2020 text (#102)
dns-violations/dnsflagday: index.md

Thank you!
==========

> The [DNS flag day 2019](/2019/) was very successful event and the Internet

Reviewer: ```
The [2019 DNS flag day](/2019/) was a very successful event. The Internet
community worked together and fixed problems which were causing delays and
other problems for Internet users worldwide. We would like to thank all
operators who cooperated and helped to make Internet a better place.
```

Author: I can't really see any text change here, beside line break, so I skipped it.

Reviewer: It splits a sentence in two and adds some missing words.

Author: ```suggestion
The [2019 DNS flag day](/2019/) was a very successful event. The Internet
```

conferences such as [DNS-OARC 30](https://www.dns-oarc.net/oarc30) panel
discussion ([video](https://youtu.be/mH_elg9EUWw?t=680),
[slides](https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/31/contributions/678/attachments/673/1102/dns_flag_day_panel.pdf)).

The proposed plan for the DNS flag day 2020 was announced at
[RIPE78](https://ripe78.ripe.net) by Petr Špaček, CZ.NIC and Ondřej Surý,
ISC ([video](https://ripe78.ripe.net/archives/video/28),
[slides](https://ripe78.ripe.net/presentations/53-plenary.pdf)). This time,
we will focus on the problems with IP fragmentation of DNS packets.

IP fragmentation is a problem on the internet today, especially when it
comes to large DNS messages. And even if fragmentation works it might not be
secure enough for DNS.
- https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-bonica-intarea-frag-fragile-03
- http://www.potaroo.net/ispcol/2017-08/xtn-hdrs.html
- Research by Kazunori Fujiwara https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/31/contributions/692/

Most of these issues can be fixed by honoring an EDNS buffer size that will
not cause fragmentation and by allowing DNS to switch from UDP to TCP when
larger buffer sizes are not enough.

Note: EDNS buffer size
----------------------

> **Please note** that the _exact recommended EDNS buffer size_ have not been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Please note** that the _exact recommended EDNS buffer sizes_ have not been
```

> agreed upon, the size around 1200 (1220, 1232, 1280...) is to limit the risk

Reviewer: ```suggestion
agreed upon, the current ballpark around 1200 (1220, 1232, ...) is to limit the risk
```

of fragmentation in IPv6.
If you have comments or suggestion then please join the discussion at
[dns-operations](https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-operations)
mailing list.

Action: Authoritative DNS Operators
-----------------------------------

For the authoritative side what you should do to help with these issues
is to **_honor [RFC 7766](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7766)_** and
answer DNS queries over TCP (port 53), _check your firewall(s) also!_

You should also use an EDNS buffer size that will not cause fragmentation,
recommended here is around 1220 bytes but it is still up for discussion.

And lastly, _Authoritative **MUST NOT** send oversized answers!_

Action: DNS Resolver Operators
------------------------------

For the resolver side it's more or less the same requirement as for the
authoritative, **_honor [RFC 7766](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7766)_**
_(DNS over TCP port 53)_ and use an EDNS buffer size _(~1220 bytes)_ that
will not cause fragmentation. _Remember to check your firewall(s)!_

> And for that last important part, _Resolvers **MUST** retry queries over

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And for that last important part, _Resolvers **MUST** repeat queries over
```

TCP if they receive a truncated UDP response (with TC=1 set)!_

Action: DNS software vendors
----------------------------

As a DNS software vendor it is important to be **standards compliant** and
to use a _**default EDNS buffer size** (~1220)_ that will not cause
fragmentation.

How to test?
------------

We are working on a web based testing tool and once it's ready you will

> find it on this page, in the mean while you can test this by using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
find it on this page, until then you can test this by using the
```

following CLI commands:

```shell
$ dig +tcp @auth_IP yourdomain.example.
$ dig +tcp @resolver_IP yourdomain.example.
$ dig @resolver_IP test.knot-resolver.cz. TXT
```

If you are a service provider you can also test your authoritative and
resolver services by allowing DNS over TCP and changing the configuration
for the default EDNS buffer size:

- BIND
```
options { edns-udp-size 1220; };
```

- Knot DNS
```
net.bufsize(1220)
```

- Knot Resolver
```
net.bufsize(1220)
```

- PowerDNS Authoritative
```
udp-truncation-threshold=1220
```

- PowerDNS Recursor
```

> edns-outgoing-bufsize=1220

Reviewer: ```suggestion
edns-outgoing-bufsize=1220
udp-truncation-threshold=1220
```

authoritative, **_honor [RFC 7766](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7766)_**
_(DNS over TCP port 53)_ and use an EDNS buffer size _(~1220 bytes)_ that
will not cause fragmentation. _Remember to check your firewall(s)!_

And for that last important part, _Resolvers **MUST** repeat queries over
TCP if they receive a truncated UDP response (with TC=1 set)!_

Action: DNS software vendors
----------------------------

As a DNS software vendor it is important to be **standards compliant** and
to use a _**default EDNS buffer size** (~1220)_ that will not cause
fragmentation.

How to test?
------------

We are working on a web based testing tool and once it's ready you will
find it on this page, until then you can test this by using the
following CLI commands:

```shell
$ dig +tcp @auth_IP yourdomain.example.
$ dig +tcp @resolver_IP yourdomain.example.
$ dig @resolver_IP test.knot-resolver.cz. TXT
```

If you are a service provider you can also test your authoritative and
resolver services by allowing DNS over TCP and changing the configuration
for the default EDNS buffer size:

- BIND
```
options { edns-udp-size 1220; };
```

- Knot DNS
```

> net.bufsize(1220)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
server:
    max-udp-payload: 1220
```

Reviewer 2: /cc @salzmdan.  Docs: https://www.knot-dns.cz/docs/latest/singlehtml/#max-udp-payload

```

- Knot Resolver
```
net.bufsize(1220)
```

- PowerDNS Authoritative
```
udp-truncation-threshold=1220
```

- PowerDNS Recursor
```
edns-outgoing-bufsize=1220
udp-truncation-threshold=1220
```

- Unbound
```
server:
    edns-buffer-size: 1220
```

- NSD
```
server:
    ipv4-edns-size: 1200
    ipv6-edns-size: 1200

> ```

Reviewer 2: Is 1200 intentional when 1220 is everywhere else?

Author: That was what the NSD people added, ping @bjovereinder

Reviewer 3: not intentional, should be 1220 indeed

What's next?
============

The next DNS flag day is being planned right now. It will focus on the
operational and security problems in DNS caused by Internet Protocol
packet fragmentation.

Please subscribe to [the dns-announce mailing list](https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-announce)
or follow [@dnsflagday on Twitter](https://www.twitter.com/dnsflagday)
to receive a notification when more information becomes available.

DNS Flag Day 2020
=================

The DNS community has been discussing persistent interoperability and
performance issues with the DNS system on industry mailing lists and at
conferences such as [DNS-OARC 30](https://www.dns-oarc.net/oarc30) panel
discussion ([video](https://youtu.be/mH_elg9EUWw?t=680),
[slides](https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/31/contributions/678/attachments/673/1102/dns_flag_day_panel.pdf)).

The proposed plan for the DNS flag day 2020 was announced at
[RIPE78](https://ripe78.ripe.net) by Petr Špaček, CZ.NIC and Ondřej Surý,
ISC ([video](https://ripe78.ripe.net/archives/video/28),
[slides](https://ripe78.ripe.net/presentations/53-plenary.pdf)). This time,
we will focus on the problems with IP fragmentation of DNS packets.

> IP fragmentation is a problem on the internet today, especially when it

Reviewer 4: internet -> Internet

Author: ```suggestion
IP fragmentation is a problem on the Internet today, especially when it
```

For the resolver side it's more or less the same requirement as for the
authoritative, **_honor [RFC 7766](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7766)_**
_(DNS over TCP port 53)_ and use an EDNS buffer size _(~1220 bytes)_ that
will not cause fragmentation. _Remember to check your firewall(s)!_

And for that last important part, _Resolvers **MUST** repeat queries over
TCP if they receive a truncated UDP response (with TC=1 set)!_

Action: DNS software vendors
----------------------------

As a DNS software vendor it is important to be **standards compliant** and
to use a _**default EDNS buffer size** (~1220)_ that will not cause
fragmentation.

How to test?
------------

We are working on a web based testing tool and once it's ready you will
find it on this page, until then you can test this by using the
following CLI commands:

```shell
$ dig +tcp @auth_IP yourdomain.example.
$ dig +tcp @resolver_IP yourdomain.example.
$ dig @resolver_IP test.knot-resolver.cz. TXT
```

If you are a service provider you can also test your authoritative and
resolver services by allowing DNS over TCP and changing the configuration
for the default EDNS buffer size:

- BIND
```

> options { edns-udp-size 1220; };

Reviewer 4: `edns-udp-size` is used to set the *advertised* EDNS UDP buffer size when sending queries to a remote server.

Given the text above I don't think that is what you want. Instead, or in addition, you want to set `max-udp-size` to `1220` that sets the maximum EDNS UDP message size, and this option applies to DNS responses sent by the server.

Author: I did not write this, this was taken from @oerdnj slides, ping @oerdnj

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
options {
    edns-udp-size 1220;
    max-udp-size 1220;
};
```

or follow [@dnsflagday on Twitter](https://www.twitter.com/dnsflagday)
to receive a notification when more information becomes available.

DNS Flag Day 2020
=================

The DNS community has been discussing persistent interoperability and
performance issues with the DNS system on industry mailing lists and at
conferences such as [DNS-OARC 30](https://www.dns-oarc.net/oarc30) panel
discussion ([video](https://youtu.be/mH_elg9EUWw?t=680),
[slides](https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/31/contributions/678/attachments/673/1102/dns_flag_day_panel.pdf)).

The proposed plan for the DNS flag day 2020 was announced at
[RIPE78](https://ripe78.ripe.net) by Petr Špaček, CZ.NIC and Ondřej Surý,
ISC ([video](https://ripe78.ripe.net/archives/video/28),
[slides](https://ripe78.ripe.net/presentations/53-plenary.pdf)). This time,
we will focus on the problems with IP fragmentation of DNS packets.

IP fragmentation is a problem on the Internet today, especially when it
comes to large DNS messages. And even if fragmentation works it might not be
secure enough for DNS.
- https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-bonica-intarea-frag-fragile-03
- http://www.potaroo.net/ispcol/2017-08/xtn-hdrs.html

> - Research by Kazunori Fujiwara https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/31/contributions/692/

Reviewer 5: I can't directly edit this, so let me put the text here:
- Bonica R. et al, "[IP Fragmentation Considered Fragile](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-bonica-intarea-frag-fragile)", Work in Progress, July 2018
- Huston G., "[IPv6, Large UDP Packets and the DNS](http://www.potaroo.net/ispcol/2017-08/xtn-hdrs.html)",  August 2017
- Fujiwara K., "[Measures against cache poisoning attacks using IP fragmentation in DNS](https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/31/contributions/692/)", May 2019

> Most of these issues can be fixed by honoring an EDNS buffer size that will

Reviewer 5: Again full text for consumation:

These issues can be fixed by honoring an EDNS buffer size that will
not cause fragmentation and by allowing DNS to switch from UDP to TCP when
larger buffer sizes are not enough.

> Most of these issues can be fixed by honoring an EDNS buffer size that will

Reviewer: Both the old and the new text are mixed here now.

> Most of these issues can be fixed by honoring an EDNS buffer size that will

Author: ```suggestion
```

not cause fragmentation and by allowing DNS to switch from UDP to TCP when
larger buffer sizes are not enough.

Note: EDNS buffer size
----------------------

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

This web site and some aspects of DNS flag day 2020 are work in progress.
Most notably the exact date is yet to be determined. Nevertheless the technical requirements
are already set so operators and developers can start testing and fixing their systems.

**Please note** that the _exact recommended EDNS buffer sizes_ have not been
agreed upon, the current ballpark around 1200 (1220, 1232, ...) is to limit the risk
of fragmentation in IPv6.
If you have comments or suggestion then please join the discussion at
[dns-operations](https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-operations)
mailing list.

Action: Authoritative DNS Operators
-----------------------------------

For the authoritative side what you should do to help with these issues
is to **_honor [RFC 7766](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7766)_** and
answer DNS queries over TCP (port 53), _check your firewall(s) also!_

You should also use an EDNS buffer size that will not cause fragmentation,
recommended here is around 1220 bytes but it is still up for discussion.

> And lastly, _Authoritative **MUST NOT** send oversized answers!_

Author: Took it from your slides.

Action: DNS Resolver Operators
------------------------------

For the resolver side it's more or less the same requirement as for the
authoritative, **_honor [RFC 7766](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7766)_**
_(DNS over TCP port 53)_ and use an EDNS buffer size _(~1220 bytes)_ that

> will not cause fragmentation. _Remember to check your firewall(s)!_

Author: Please suggest full text.

And for that last important part, _Resolvers **MUST** repeat queries over
TCP if they receive a truncated UDP response (with TC=1 set)!_

Action: DNS software vendors
----------------------------

As a DNS software vendor it is important to be **standards compliant** and
to use a _**default EDNS buffer size** (~1220)_ that will not cause

> fragmentation.

Author: I don't think it's usual that DNS software set IP level don't fragment, but if you have examples please add text.

How to test?
------------

We are working on a web based testing tool and once it's ready you will
find it on this page, until then you can test this by using the
following CLI commands:

```shell
$ dig +tcp @auth_IP yourdomain.example.
$ dig +tcp @resolver_IP yourdomain.example.
$ dig @resolver_IP test.knot-resolver.cz. TXT
```

If you are a service provider you can also test your authoritative and
resolver services by allowing DNS over TCP and changing the configuration
for the default EDNS buffer size:

- BIND
```
options {
    edns-udp-size 1220;
    max-udp-size 1220;
};
```

- Knot DNS
```
server:
    max-udp-payload: 1220
```

- Knot Resolver
```
net.bufsize(1220)
```

- PowerDNS Authoritative
```
udp-truncation-threshold=1220
```

- PowerDNS Recursor
```
edns-outgoing-bufsize=1220
udp-truncation-threshold=1220
```

- Unbound
```
server:
    edns-buffer-size: 1220
```

- NSD
```
server:

>     ipv4-edns-size: 1200

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ipv4-edns-size: 1220
```

>     ipv6-edns-size: 1200

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ipv6-edns-size: 1220
```

Thank you!
==========

> The [DNS flag day 2019](/2019/) was very successful event and the Internet

Reviewer 7: The Internet community successfully worked together and fixed problems causing delays and other problems for Internet users worldwide on [DNS flag day 2019](/2019/).

Please subscribe to [the dns-announce mailing list](https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-announce)
or follow [@dnsflagday on Twitter](https://www.twitter.com/dnsflagday)
to receive a notification when more information becomes available.

DNS Flag Day 2020
=================

The DNS community has been discussing persistent interoperability and
performance issues with the DNS system on industry mailing lists and at
conferences such as [DNS-OARC 30](https://www.dns-oarc.net/oarc30) panel
discussion ([video](https://youtu.be/mH_elg9EUWw?t=680),
[slides](https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/31/contributions/678/attachments/673/1102/dns_flag_day_panel.pdf)).

The proposed plan for the DNS flag day 2020 was announced at
[RIPE78](https://ripe78.ripe.net) by Petr Špaček, CZ.NIC and Ondřej Surý,
ISC ([video](https://ripe78.ripe.net/archives/video/28),
[slides](https://ripe78.ripe.net/presentations/53-plenary.pdf)). This time,
we will focus on the problems with IP fragmentation of DNS packets.

IP fragmentation is a problem on the Internet today, especially when it
comes to large DNS messages. And even if fragmentation works it might not be
secure enough for DNS.

> - https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-bonica-intarea-frag-fragile-03

Author: ```suggestion
- Bonica R. et al, "[IP Fragmentation Considered Fragile](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-bonica-intarea-frag-fragile)", Work in Progress, July 2018
```

> - http://www.potaroo.net/ispcol/2017-08/xtn-hdrs.html

Author: ```suggestion
- Huston G., "[IPv6, Large UDP Packets and the DNS](http://www.potaroo.net/ispcol/2017-08/xtn-hdrs.html)",  August 2017
```

> - Research by Kazunori Fujiwara https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/31/contributions/692/

Author: ```suggestion
- Fujiwara K., "[Measures against cache poisoning attacks using IP fragmentation in DNS](https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/31/contributions/692/)", May 2019
```

Most of these issues can be fixed by honoring an EDNS buffer size that will
not cause fragmentation and by allowing DNS to switch from UDP to TCP when
larger buffer sizes are not enough.

Note: Work in progress
----------------------

> This web site and some aspects of DNS flag day 2020 are work in progress.

Reviewer 7: The exact date for the 2020 DNS Flag Day is not yet determined, and the exact recommended EDNS buffer sizes have not been agreed upon (the current consensus is that a buffer size of 1220 - 1232 will work best to limit the risk of fragmentation in IPv6. 
Nevertheless, the technical requirements are already clear enough that operators and developers can start preparing by testing and fixing their systems.

Author: You need to review this as a `suggestion`, can't really see what you changed.

Reviewer 7: I was just trying to improve the English for the first 4 sentences. I am not sure what i did wrong here.

Most notably the exact date is yet to be determined. Nevertheless the technical requirements
are already set so operators and developers can start testing and fixing their systems.
**Please note** that the _exact recommended EDNS buffer sizes_ have not been
agreed upon, the current ballpark around 1200 (1220, 1232, ...) is to limit the risk
of fragmentation in IPv6.
If you have comments or suggestion then please join the discussion at
[dns-operations](https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-operations)
mailing list.

Action: Authoritative DNS Operators
-----------------------------------

> For the authoritative side what you should do to help with these issues

Reviewer 7: To comply with the Internet standards, authoritative systems must **honor

[RIPE78](https://ripe78.ripe.net) by Petr Špaček, CZ.NIC and Ondřej Surý,
ISC ([video](https://ripe78.ripe.net/archives/video/28),
[slides](https://ripe78.ripe.net/presentations/53-plenary.pdf)). This time,
we will focus on the problems with IP fragmentation of DNS packets.

IP fragmentation is a problem on the Internet today, especially when it
comes to large DNS messages. And even if fragmentation works it might not be
secure enough for DNS.
- Bonica R. et al, "[IP Fragmentation Considered Fragile](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-bonica-intarea-frag-fragile)", Work in Progress, July 2018
- Huston G., "[IPv6, Large UDP Packets and the DNS](http://www.potaroo.net/ispcol/2017-08/xtn-hdrs.html)",  August 2017
- Fujiwara K., "[Measures against cache poisoning attacks using IP fragmentation in DNS](https://indico.dns-oarc.net/event/31/contributions/692/)", May 2019

These issues can be fixed by honoring an EDNS buffer size that will
not cause fragmentation and by allowing DNS to switch from UDP to TCP when
larger buffer sizes are not enough.

Note: Work in progress
----------------------

This web site and some aspects of DNS flag day 2020 are work in progress.

> Most notably the exact date is yet to be determined. Nevertheless the technical requirements

Author: ```suggestion
- The exact date for the 2020 DNS Flag Day is not yet determined.
```

> are already set so operators and developers can start testing and fixing their systems.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> **Please note** that the _exact recommended EDNS buffer sizes_ have not been

Author: ```suggestion
- **Please note** that the _exact recommended EDNS buffer sizes_ have not been
```

agreed upon, the current ballpark around 1200 (1220, 1232, ...) is to limit the risk
of fragmentation in IPv6.

> If you have comments or suggestion then please join the discussion at

Author: ```suggestion

Nevertheless, the technical requirements are already clear enough that operators and developers can start preparing by testing and fixing their systems.

If you have comments or suggestion then please join the discussion at
```

Thank you!
==========

The [DNS flag day 2019](/2019/) was very successful event and the Internet
community worked together and fixed problems which were causing delays and

> other problems for Internet users worldwide. We would like to thank to all

Author: ```suggestion
other problems for Internet users worldwide. We would like to thank all
```

> operators who cooperated and helped to make Internet a better place.

Author: ```suggestion
operators who cooperated and helped to make Internet a better place.
```

If you have technical questions around DNS flag day you can join
[the DNS-operations mailing list](https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-operations)
and ask them there.

Get in touch
============

For press & media inquiries please use media (at) dns-oarc.net and please put
“DNS Flag Day" in the email subject line.

- Web https://dnsflagday.net/
- Twitter https://twitter.com/dnsflagday
- Announcements: https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-announce
- Discussion: https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-operations

FAQ
===

- Q: Is DNS over UDP dead?

  A: No, UDP will still be the main means of transportation.

- Q: TL;DR [RFC 7766](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7766)

  A: DNS **MUST** work over TCP!

- Q: Will everything break on date-to-be-decided 2020?

  A: **No!** The date that will be announced is just a marker in time from
     which the default behavior _**in new software releases**_ will be

>      changed.

Reviewer 4: - Q: Why is TCP support so important?

  A: TCP support should be implemented from the beginning of DNS, although some may have taken the early specification to mean that the transport protocol is optional. Hence ten years ago RFC 5966 made TCP support mandatory. Blocking TCP, or failure to support TCP, may result in resolution failure and application-level timeouts. 
  
  In addition, TCP can be operated in a mode that does not require IP fragmentation, and makes it harder to spoof DNS responses.

- Q: Why not just switch to TCP only?

  A: DNS over UDP is fine for small packets that do not require IP fragmentation. It can still be used for that class of DNS messages, which is the larger part of the Internet traffic. Switching everything over on TCP may cause stress on DNS services. While in principle DNS over TCP only should be feasable, it is slower than DNS over UDP, in the best case by a factor of 4, and it may limit the number of connections a DNS server can accept simultaneously.

- Q: Will this Flag Day require a software update, or is it only a configuration change?

  A: All open source DNS servers already support TCP and respect the configured EDNS buffer sizes. At most, DNS operators will have to change their configuration as described in "How to test?"

If you have technical questions around DNS flag day you can join
[the DNS-operations mailing list](https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-operations)
and ask them there.

Get in touch
============

For press & media inquiries please use media (at) dns-oarc.net and please put
“DNS Flag Day" in the email subject line.

- Web https://dnsflagday.net/
- Twitter https://twitter.com/dnsflagday
- Announcements: https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-announce
- Discussion: https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-operations

FAQ
===

- Q: Is DNS over UDP dead?

  A: No, UDP will still be the main means of transportation.

- Q: TL;DR [RFC 7766](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7766)

  A: DNS **MUST** work over TCP!

- Q: Will everything break on date-to-be-decided 2020?

  A: **No!** The date that will be announced is just a marker in time from
     which the default behavior _**in new software releases**_ will be
     changed.

- Q: Why is TCP support so important?

>   A: TCP support should be implemented from the beginning of DNS, although some

Author: ```suggestion
  A: TCP support should be implemented from the beginning, although some
```
@matje `of DNS` sounds a bit weird, what you think?

Reviewer 4: from the beginning of what? ;-)

But fair enough, happy to see the suggested change being merged.

Author: @matje how about now?

     may have taken the early specification to mean that the transport protocol is
     optional. Hence ten years ago [RFC 5966](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5966) made
     TCP support mandatory. Blocking TCP, or failure to support TCP, may result in
     resolution failure and application-level timeouts. 
  
     In addition, TCP can be operated in a mode that does not require IP
     fragmentation, and makes it harder to spoof DNS responses.

- Q: Why not just switch to TCP only?

  A: DNS over UDP is fine for small packets that do not require IP fragmentation.
     It can still be used for that class of DNS messages, which is the larger part of
     the Internet traffic. Switching everything over on TCP may cause stress on
     DNS services. While in principle DNS over TCP only should be feasible, it is

>      slower than DNS over UDP, in the best case by a factor of 4, and it may limit

Author: @matje Do you have a reference to `factor of 4` statement?

Reviewer 4: @jelu Sure it is based on Baptiste Jonglez work (https://ripe76.ripe.net/archives/video/63/)

Author: ```suggestion
     slower than DNS over UDP, in the best case by a factor of 4 (based on
     Baptiste Jonglez work [presented at RIPE76](https://ripe76.ripe.net/archives/video/63/)), and it may limit
```

Reviewer 2: So, perhaps convert a part of the sentence to a hyperlink?

If you have technical questions around DNS flag day you can join
[the DNS-operations mailing list](https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-operations)
and ask them there.

Get in touch
============

For press & media inquiries please use media (at) dns-oarc.net and please put
“DNS Flag Day" in the email subject line.

- Web https://dnsflagday.net/
- Twitter https://twitter.com/dnsflagday
- Announcements: https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-announce
- Discussion: https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-operations

FAQ
===

- Q: Is DNS over UDP dead?

>   A: No, UDP will still be the main means of transportation.

Reviewer 7: No. DNS over UDP is massively scaleable, very resource-efficient and fault-tolerant. UDP will remain the primary transport protocol for DNS. We just need to ensure that DNS over TCP is available everywhere when required, so that all implementers and operators can rely on its availability.

- Q: TL;DR [RFC 7766](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7766)

>   A: DNS **MUST** work over TCP!

Reviewer 7: The Internet specifications have ensured for decades that independently-developed systems can interoperate reliably over the open public Internet. These specification call out features that MUST, SHOULD, and MUST NOT work for universal interoperability. DNS over TCP has been agreed upon as a feature that **MUST** be supported. A very small percentage of the Internet is not meeting this requirement, which is causing trouble for the majority, who are respecting the established standards.

Author: This was a TL;DR, answers should be very short.

- Q: Will everything break on date-to-be-decided 2020?

  A: Certainly not everything! Only a small percentage of sites is affected, and this number is shrinking as operators
     work on fixing their systems. On the date that will be announced major DNS resolver operators will stop
     tolerating misbehavior which breaks published standards, so this change will not affect sites which follows
     published standards. Also, on the announced date software vendors will change behavior
     _**in new software releases**_, so this change will also slowly affect others who operate their own
     DNS resolvers.

- Q: Why is TCP support so important?

>   A: DNS software should implement TCP support from the beginning, although some

Reviewer 7: A: Blocking TCP, or failure to support TCP, may result in resolution failure and application-level timeouts.  

In addition, TCP can be operated in a mode that does not require IP fragmentation, and makes it harder to spoof DNS responses.

It was expected, but not explicitly required from the early standards specification that DNS should work over TCP. Hence ten years ago [RFC 5966](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5966) made it clear that TCP support mandatory for compliance with the Internet standards for DNS.

Author: @vrisk are you suggesting to review the whole answer or parts of it?

@pspacek @matje Can't remember who of you wrote the answer but are you OK with the change if it changes the whole answer?

Reviewer 4: @jelu I took the first stab writing an answer. I am okay if the text that @vrisk suggests changes my whole answer: It covers everything I said before.

Some minor suggestions: "It was expected" sounds a bit weak, and I don't see the need for "IS" being in all capitals. I propose to change the last paragraph that Vicky suggested to:
```
It was recommended from the early standards specification that DNS should work over TCP.  Some implementers may have taken that to mean TCP was optional, and so ten years ago [RFC 5966](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5966) made it clear that TCP support is absolutely required for compliance with the Internet standards for DNS.
```

Reviewer 7: yeah, I was trying to replace the answer. but actually rereading it, I don't think my answer was so great either.  "TCP can be operated in a mode" - what the heck does that even mean?

Reviewer 4: "TCP can be operated in a mode" can be more clear (but should it for a FAQ?). The specifics:  they normally implement Path MTU Discovery and can avoid IP fragmentation of TCP segments.

I don't think we should make the perfect text, but focus on what should be in the answer. I do appreciate the review to improve the answer. I think the order of arguments that @vrisk proposes also makes more sense. How about:

```suggestion
  A: Blocking TCP, or failure to support TCP, may result in resolution failure and application-level timeouts. 
  
  Furthermore, TCP normally implements Path MTU Discovery and can avoid IP fragmentation of TCP segments. It also makes it harder to spoof DNS responses.
  
  Finally, TCP support was recommended from the early standards specification, but some implementers may have taken that to mean TCP was optional, and so ten years ago RFC 5966 made it clear that TCP support is absolutely required for compliance with the Internet standards for DNS.
```

Author: ```suggestion
  A: Blocking TCP, or failure to support TCP, may result in resolution failure and
     application-level timeouts.

     Furthermore, TCP normally implements Path MTU Discovery and can avoid
     IP fragmentation of TCP segments. It also makes it harder to spoof DNS responses.

     Finally, TCP support was recommended from the early standards specification, but
     some implementers may have taken that to mean TCP was optional, and so
     ten years ago (August 2010) [RFC 5966](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5966)
     made it clear that TCP support is absolutely required for compliance with the
     Internet standards for DNS.
```

     may have taken the early specification to mean that the transport protocol is
     optional. Hence ten years ago [RFC 5966](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5966) made
     TCP support mandatory. Blocking TCP, or failure to support TCP, may result in
     resolution failure and application-level timeouts. 
  
     In addition, TCP can be operated in a mode that does not require IP
     fragmentation, and makes it harder to spoof DNS responses.

- Q: Why not just switch to TCP only?

  A: DNS over UDP is fine for small packets that do not require IP fragmentation.
     It can still be used for that class of DNS messages, which is the larger part of
     the Internet traffic. Switching everything over on TCP may cause stress on
     DNS services. While in principle DNS over TCP only should be feasible, it is
     slower than DNS over UDP, in the best case by a factor of 4 (based on
     Baptiste Jonglez work [presented at RIPE76](https://ripe76.ripe.net/archives/video/63/)), and it may limit
     the number of connections a DNS server can accept simultaneously.

- Q: Will this Flag Day require a software update?

>   A: DNS software which follows published standards does not require upgrade and will continue to work.

Reviewer 7: All major open source DNS servers comply with the relevant Internet standards already. Whether a particular deployment is compliant depends on the way the software is configured, and on the firewall configuration used at that site.  
Less commonly-used and custom or proprietary DNS software may not be compliant, and may require updates.

     E.g. supported versions of major open source DNS servers will continue to work correctly.

>      Non-standard software might require fixes from its vendor.

Author: ```suggestion

     Whether a particular deployment is compliant depends on the way the software
     is configured, and on the firewall configuration used at that site.
     Less commonly-used and custom or proprietary DNS software may not be
     compliant, and may require updates.
```

- Announcements: https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-announce
- Discussion: https://lists.dns-oarc.net/mailman/listinfo/dns-operations

FAQ
===

- Q: Is DNS over UDP dead?

  A: No, DNS over UDP will still be the main means of transportation as it
     is massively scalable, very resource-efficient and fault-tolerant.

- Q: TL;DR [RFC 7766](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7766)

  A: DNS **MUST** work over TCP!

- Q: Will everything break on date-to-be-decided 2020?

  A: Certainly not everything! Only a small percentage of sites is affected, and this number is shrinking as operators
     work on fixing their systems. On the date that will be announced major DNS resolver operators will stop
     tolerating misbehavior which breaks published standards, so this change will not affect sites which follows
     published standards. Also, on the announced date software vendors will change behavior
     _**in new software releases**_, so this change will also slowly affect others who operate their own
     DNS resolvers.

- Q: Why is TCP support so important?

  A: DNS software should implement TCP support from the beginning, although some

>      may have taken the early specification to mean that the transport protocol is

Author: ```suggestion
```

>      optional. Hence ten years ago [RFC 5966](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5966) made

Author: ```suggestion
```

>      TCP support mandatory. Blocking TCP, or failure to support TCP, may result in

Author: ```suggestion
```

>      resolution failure and application-level timeouts. 

Author: ```suggestion
```

>   

Author: ```suggestion
```

>      In addition, TCP can be operated in a mode that does not require IP

Author: ```suggestion
```

>      fragmentation, and makes it harder to spoof DNS responses.

Author: ```suggestion
```

     is massively scalable, very resource-efficient and fault-tolerant.

- Q: TL;DR [RFC 7766](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7766)

  A: DNS **MUST** work over TCP!

- Q: Will everything break on date-to-be-decided 2020?

  A: Certainly not everything! Only a small percentage of sites is affected, and this number is shrinking as operators
     work on fixing their systems. On the date that will be announced major DNS resolver operators will stop
     tolerating misbehavior which breaks published standards, so this change will not affect sites which follows
     published standards. Also, on the announced date software vendors will change behavior
     _**in new software releases**_, so this change will also slowly affect others who operate their own
     DNS resolvers.

- Q: Why is TCP support so important?

  A: Blocking TCP, or failure to support TCP, may result in resolution failure and
     application-level timeouts.

     Furthermore, TCP normally implements Path MTU Discovery and can avoid
     IP fragmentation of TCP segments. It also makes it harder to spoof DNS responses.

     Finally, TCP support was recommended from the early standards specification, but

>      some implementers may have taken that to mean TCP was optional, and so

Author: ```suggestion
     some implementers may have taken that to mean TCP was optional, and so about
```
